# Rendering Arrays

## 📝 Your Notes

When React renders array of elements we have to be more careful. 
React asks for a key prop while rendering a list/array of elements.

If you don't provide a key then there will be some weird stuff happening with UI.

Let's take an example of a list of elements rendered initially:-
1 Orange 🍊
2 Apple  🍎
3 Banana 🍌

Assume the component re-rendered after deleting Orange and next list of items will be
1 Apple 🍎
2 Banana 🍌

Now React will compare these two lists:-

      OLD TREE
      1 Orange 🍊  
      2 Apple  🍎   
      3 Banana 🍌  

      NEW TREE
      1 Apple  🍎 
      2 Banana 🍌   
      


Now, it will think that last item is removed from the list. It will remove last item and changes
labels of Orange to Apple and uses the prev value of Orange. In the same way it changes label of Apple
to banana and uses value of apple then it will render following elements on page

1 Apple 🍊
2 Banana 🍎

This is the same thing that happens when you use index as key.

The reason for this behaviour is React's misinterpretation of identifying elements
So you need to pass unique key prop so that React identify which element is removed and which is not 
with the help of Key. This might not be a problem when your component doesn't use any state but
if your component contains any state especially input value with state then this might lead to a big
problem in your application

Also Intresting thing about key prop is it controls the component instances. 
When state is changed a component with new instance with that state is created. So react maintains different instances with different states that's the reason why one component/element mounting 
or unmounting doesn't effect other components.

So, when a component is re-rendered react will call functions in the components to retrieve
the react elements. If the type of element is same in previous tree and present tree it will keep
same previous elements even though all the props are changed.

When you mention unique key prop on the element it will force React to unmount previous instance
and render same element with new instance. This means that all state that had existed in the component at the time is completely removed and the component is "reinitialized" for all intents and purposes.

## Background

One of the more tricky things with React is the requirement of a `key` prop when
you attempt to render a list of elements.

If we want to render a list like this, then there's no problem:

```jsx
const ui = (
  <ul>
    <li>One</li>
    <li>Two</li>
    <li>Three</li>
  </ul>
)
```

But rendering an array of elements is very common:

```jsx
const list = ['One', 'Two', 'Three']

const ui = (
  <ul>
    {list.map(listItem => (
      <li>{listItem}</li>
    ))}
  </ul>
)
```

Those will generate the same HTML, but what it actually does is slightly
different. Let's re-write it to see that difference:

```jsx
const list = ['One', 'Two', 'Three']
const listUI = list.map(listItem => <li>{listItem}</li>)
// notice that listUI is an array
const ui = <ul>{listUI}</ul>
```

So we're interpolating an array of renderable elements. This is totally
acceptable, but it has interesting implications for when things change over
time.

If you re-render that list with an added item, React doesn't really know whether
you added an item in the middle, beginning, or end. And the same goes for when
you remove an item (it doesn't know whether that happened in the middle,
beginning, or end either).

In this example, it's not a big deal, because React's best-guess is right and it
works out ok. However, if any of those React elements represent a component that
is maintaining state, that can be pretty problematic, which this exercise
demonstrates.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/07.js)
- [Final](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/07.js)

We've got a problem. You may have already noticed the error message in the
console about it. Try this:

1. Hit the "remove" button on the last list item
2. Notice that list item is now gone 👍
3. Hit the "remove" button on the first list item
4. Notice that everything's mixed up! 😦

Let me describe what's going on here.

Here's the TL;DR: Every React element accepts a special `key` prop you can use
to help React keep track of elements between updates. If you don't provide it
when rendering a list, React can get things mixed up. The solution is to give
each element a unique (to the array) `key` prop, and then everything will work
fine.

Let's dive in a little deeper:

If you re-render that list with an added item, React doesn't really know whether
you added an item in the middle, beginning, or end. And the same goes for when
you remove an item (it doesn't know whether that happened in the middle,
beginning, or end either).

To be clear, _we_ know as the developer because we wrote the code, but as far as
React is concerned, we simply gave it some react elements before, we gave it
some after, and now React is trying to compare the before and after with no
knowledge of how the elements got from one position to another.

Sometimes it's not a big deal, because React's best-guess is right and it works
out ok. However, if any of those React elements represent a component that is
maintaining state (like the value of an input or focus state), that can be
pretty problematic, which this exercise demonstrates.

To solve this problem, we need to give React a hint so it can associate the old
React elements with the new ones we're giving it due to the change. We do this
using a special prop called the `key` prop.

In this exercise, we have a list of fruit that appear and can be removed. There
is state that exists (managed by the browser) in the `<input />` for each of the
fruit: the input's `value` (initialized via the `defaultValue` prop).

Without a `key` prop, for all React knows, you removed an input and gave another
label different text content, which leads to the bug we'll see in the exercise.

So here's the rule:

**Whenever you're rendering an array of React elements, each one must have a
unique `key` prop.**

📜 You can learn more about what can go wrong when you don't specify the `key`
prop in my blog post
[Understanding React's key prop](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/understanding-reacts-key-prop).

📜 Also, you can get a deeper understanding in this blog post:
[Why React needs a key prop](https://epicreact.dev/why-react-needs-a-key-prop).
That'll give you a bit of what's going on under the hood, so I recommend reading
this!

🐨 The React elements we're rendering are the `li` elements, so for this
exercise, add a `key` prop there. You can use the `item.id` for the value to
ensure that the key value is unique for each element.

🦉 Note, the key only needs to be unique within a given array. So this works
fine:

```tsx
const element = (
  <ul>
    {list.map(listItem => (
      <li key={listItem.id}>{listItem.value}</li>
    ))}
    {list.map(listItem => (
      <li key={listItem.id}>{listItem.value}</li>
    ))}
  </ul>
)
```

🦉 In our example, the `value` of the input is managed by the browser, but this
has even bigger implications when we start working with our own state and
side-effects. It's a little too early to demonstrate this for you, but you
should know that when React removes a component from the DOM, it gets
"unmounted" which will trigger side-effect cleanups, and if new elements are
added then those will be "mounted" and will trigger your side-effects. This can
cause some surprising and problematic issues for your users. So just remember
the rule and always provide a `key` when rendering an array. Later when you have
more React experience, you can come back to this exercise and expand it a bit
with custom components that manage state and side-effects to observe the
problems caused when you ignore the `key`.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 Focus Demo

[Production deploy](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/07.extra-1.js)

🐨 For this extra credit, open the production deploy above.

You can observe that when we're talking about "state" we're also talking about
keyboard focus as well as what text is selected! As you play around with this,
try selecting text in the inputs and observe how the first two examples differ
from the last one. You'll notice that using the array `index` as a key is no
different from React's default behavior, so it's unlikely to fix issues if
you're having them. Best to use a unique ID. Play around with it! (Remember,
you'll find the source for this demo in the `final` directory).

There are some other interesting things you can do with `key`s as well (like
changing them on an element to intentionally reset the state of a component).
Feel free to play around with that if you like, but we'll be using that in a
future workshop so look forward to it!

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Fundamentals%20%E2%9A%9B&e=07%3A%20Rendering%20Arrays&em=devateja58%40gmail.com).
